---
title: "Degoogling Myself Part 2: Not Just Google This Time..."
author: Kevin Nel
last_modified_at: 2020-01-08
---

<!--
to do:
flesh out bullet lists
add images (gen z attention span)
add links (eff "I have nothing to hide", spotify new patent, facebook manipulation, whatsapp privacy policy etc.)
better introduction
https://maxdesalle.com/privacy-how-to-get-off-the-radar-with-ease/ good brief summary
-->

My last attempt at documenting my exploration into online privacy awareness was to be frank quite bad.
At best it was a crude summary.
Since then (2018) I have learned a lot and cracked down on data collection by big corporations even further.

This article will address three main areas

1. Why should you care if you have nothing to hide?
2. What are some **easy** things you can do and simple habit changes that can help.
3. The next steps that I have taken since my last article (This will cover some more advanced things and stuff that may be a bit difficult to do if you are comfortable with the conveniences of the modern web)

---

## Why Should You Care?

1. It's not about having something to hide its about being able to choose what you have to say.
2. Big tech has the power to not only manipulate you personally but manipulate the entire world.
    - companies like facebook, google, and amazon make money off of advertising and the private information they collect on you gives then the ability to not only run a successful advertising campaign but to guarantee more business for the companies paying them to advertise. They are able to manipulate and shape information on a per person basis in order to get you to click on a link or even change your opinion on topics.
3. It is selfish to not care.
    - you don't realise how much information about your friends and other contacts you are giving away when you are careless.
    - does that mobile game really need access to your contacts, calendar and phone logs?
4. Privacy is a human right

---

## Some Easy First Steps

### Switching To Software That Respects Your Privacy By Default

google or bing search engine -> duckduckgo

- no filter bubble
- instant answers 
  - qr code
  - color picker
  - calculator
  - weather 
  - programming cheatsheets
  - and [many more](https://duck.co/ia)
- reliable websites are the first suggestions not sponsored posts
- no tracking
- built in dark mode!
  
google password remembering features -> bitwarden (multidevice cloud sync) or keepass (offline)

whatsapp or fb messenger -> signal

discord -> matrix

spotify -> apple music -> buying drm free files off sites like bandcamp

chrome -> firefox or brave

gmail -> protonmail or tutanota (this step can take a lot of work depending on how many online accounts you have.)


## Fixing Bad Habits

### Don't Stay Logged In All The Time

another easy fix is to not stay logged in for months on end.
This is especially easy to do on mobile where apps make it very easy to forget about.
Log out of apps after using them and clear your browser's cookies, site data and history (ctrl shift delete for most browsers) after each browser session and before doing things like shopping.

- use an adblocker (ublock origin)
- block 3rd party cookies

### Disable Your Location On Mobile

The overwhelming majority of apps **do not need your location**.
Except for maybe your GPS app, most apps only want access to your location so they can link users who are in close proximity and better profile you based on the people you surround yourself with.

Android 10 has the ability to allow apps access to your location only while using them. Use this feature if you need to leave location on for "Find My Device".

You can also disable nearby device scanning and the other location stuff in android settings if you don't need to use the "Find My Device" feature.

### Don't Let Apps Run In The Background Unless You Need Them To

in newer versions of android (ver 8 and up) you can prevent an app from running in the background by adding it to "Sleeping" apps or by going to the "App Info" page for the app in settings and disabling background use in the battery optimization settings.

### Be Careful Of The Permissions You Grant To Apps And Websites

If an app does not obviously need a hardware feature like the camera or location, don't grant it access to it.
Most mobile OS's are getting better at making the user aware of what permissions an app is asking for but it doesn't hurt to go and check what permissions all your apps have.
In newer versions of Android (9+) there is a permissions manager in the device settings where you can manage all the permissions.
Oftentimes the stock apps that came with your smartphone will have pre-granted access to all permissions.

My Samsung calculator app had location and contacts access!

<!-- add screenshot here -->

### Tweaking Your Privacy Options

Almost all sites and online services that use an account allow you to tweak your privacy settings.
Google allows very fine control over your account and even lets you disable targeted advertising and reset your advertising ID (a unique identifier that allows google to combine multiple sources of information on you to map your interests).
beyond that you should disable any features you don't absolutely need (for example location data).

> It's important to check these settings every once in a while as new features can be added or old settings can be reset.

---

## Bravo 6 Going Dark, (Advanced Tips)

what I've done:

- switched almost entirely to signal (thank you Whatsapp privacy policy update!)
- deleted my mostly dormant facebook page
  - i do miss facebook marketplace as most of the people in my area are using that instead of the usual craigslist style buy and sell websites like gumtree
- i still use instagram
  - in the browser with 3rd party cookies and trackers blocked
- switched to a private email provider (tutanota)
  - this was by far the toughest thing to do
  - my google account was almost 10 years old
  - tutanota aliases to the rescue
- enable 2fa on every website that supports it

---

## Bonus Round! Things I Am Still Working On

Fighting to maintain your privacy is a journey, and making even small progress is better than none.
So don't feel like it's not worth doing unless you do it all.
Do what you can and what fits with your needs, but don't trust the defaults, they are almost never in your favour
but even if you've been doing it for a while there are always new things to learn and new challenges to tackle.

1. changing from discord to element
2. switching full time to linux for personal use (music production)
